# 2025-02-15 Preview of Nekot Coco Microkernel

## Designed For Coco

Any Coco 1, 2, or 3, with at least 16K RAM.

Probaby Dragon 32/64 as well.

For fairness, all cocos run in "Least Common Donominator" mode:

* either VDG TEXT(32x16)/Semigraphics(64x32) or VDG PMODE1(128x96,4color)
[at first]

* Slow 0.89 MHz Clock

## Designed For Public Gaming

The "programs" or "Apps" that this OS runs are called "Games".

The emphasis is multiplayer, but they can be single player,
or even non-interactive (Life viewer, music player, video player,
infomation kiosk, like clock & weather).

Shares lots of data with all on the same global server,
including three-letter usernames & scores.
You may be pseudonymous but not private.

## Designed Fast Network (not bit-banged UART)

options:

* Rick Uland's CocoIOr

* Copico Bonobo (forthcoming)

* Perhaps FujiNet hardware (forthcoming)

* more?

## Games run on your Coco, not on your PC or in the Cloud

* All Game Dynamics are Coco-to-Coco Peer-to-Peer

## Network Communications 

* Network communcations are high-speed and are mediated by PCs/Macs/Linux/Raspberries,
the internet, and a global server.

* In-Game communication is very simple: a single max-64-byte message once per second
from each node to all other nodes, forwarded through a global server.  

* Reliable 1-time Ordered Delivery?

* The OS does its own communications for chatting, rendez-vous, listing &
loading games, logging, debugging.

## Background OS vs Foreground Game

* OS is Minimal (a Microkernel, focused on allocating Memory, processing Tasks, Messaging, Interrupt handling).

* Not a traditional BIOS or CPM or DOS-like or OS-9-like or Unix-like OS.

* The OS owns

   1. The Networking hardware (includes loading and launching games)
   1. The 60Hz "Vertical Sync" interrupt (i.e. "Frame Sync" on VDG)
   1. Real Time Clock (realtime as in RTOS)
   1. Wall Time Clock
   1. One 512-byte Text display buffer (the console)
   1. The BREAK Key
   1. Video Mode switching (can switch to "console" then restore "game")
   1. Scores reported by games

* OS runs during background 60hz interrupts! can be concurrent with the foreground game.

* A huge amount of support for the OS is in the Global Server (to save Coco RAM for Games).
This is the opposite of the policy for Games, where all game logic runs on Cocos!

# Global Server

OS has a Global Server, for 
*  storing and loading games, 
*  player chat,
*  player rendez-vous, 
*  score keeping.  
*  No game dynamics.

# The OS UI is "Chat mode" (on the console)

   1.  Everybody is in one big chat lobby (think IRC).
   1.  Users `/join` and `/run` and `/leave` games & game shards.

# Game Responsibility

   1. Main program Event Loop
   1. Game's Frame Buffer (3K available) for Text or PMode1 Graphics (raw RAM)
   1. Polling/Scanning the Keyboard, Joystick (raw hardware, shares PIAs with OS; disable IRQs)
   1. Polling the network (via OS API)
   1. Noise

Libraries can assist.

# Games can

   1. Broacast short messages (64 bytes or less) to others in the same
game shard, and Receive these messages from others in the same shard.
   1. Keep partial scores (totaled and saved by the OS)

# Game API

* `TrySend()`

* `TryRecv()`

* `Overlay(const char* overlay_name)`

* `Chain(const char* game_name, byte* param64)`

* Real Time

For timing the game dynamics, poll these:

```
struct real {
    byte ticks;  // Changes at 60Hz:  0 to 5
    byte decis;  // Tenths of a second: 0 to 9
    uint seconds;  // 0 to 65535
} Real;
```

* Wall Time

For displaying time & date:

```
struct wall {
    byte second; // 0 to 59
    byte minute; // 0 to 59
    byte hour;  // 0 to 23

    byte day;   // 1 to 31
    byte month; // 1 to 12
    byte year2000;  // e.g. 25 means 2025
    byte dow[3];  // e.g. Mon
    byte moy[3];  // e.g. Jan
} Wall;
```

* Scores

Each player's coco publishes Partial scores for all players.
The network OS sums them and provides Total score.

```
struct scores {
    byte NumberOfPlayers; // read only, 1..8
    byte YourPlayerNumber; // read only, 0..7
    word Total[8];   // read only
    word Partial[8]; // Game should write
} Scores;
```

* `Console_Printf()`

* `Network_Log()`


# Work in progress

*    https://github.com/strickyak/nekot-coco-microkernel

*    https://computerconect.com/products/cocoio-prom (CocoIOr ethernet card)

*    https://github.com/strickyak/copico-bonobo (mac/PC/Linux/Pi-assisted network card)
